---
layout: post
title: In which we re-inaugurate this blog
permalink: in-which-we-talk-a-lot 
tags: meta
---

We'll talk a lot about number theory and algebraic geometry, starting with a treatment of some algebraic number theory and scheme theory over the next few months. The short-term goals are the finiteness of the class number of a number field and the definition of the $\text{Proj}$ of a graded ring, and I'd like to talk about class field theory or sheaf cohomology around the end of the year. Also, I'll try to make it as fun, motivated, and low on prerequisites as possible. So, if you haven't heard of number fields or schemes ... that *might* just be fine, as long as you're (hopefully) able to define a ring and have a vague idea of what a topology is and are willing to "read around" to pick up ideas you don't know.

Very long-term, I want to be able to talk intelligently about étale cohomology and the Weil conjectures. Also, here's a formula for you because you're probably an agreeable human being and I like you (and I need to know if MathJax is being uncooperative):

\\[H ^ r(X, \\Q _ l) := \\varprojlim H ^ r(X,\\Z/l ^ m\\Z) \\otimes _ {\\Z _ l} \\Q _ l\\]

(We should get to that in less than a year!) There's some other stuff I'm thinking about putting up over the next few months, which is mostly things that I didn't know well enough until I took classes on them at Mathcamp this summer:

* the unitary characters of \\(\\Q\\), and the ring of adeles
* the BSD conjecture, modularity, elliptic curves
* the Lenstra elliptic curve factorization method
* basic, "real" analytic number theory, and using it to prove Chebyshev's theorem
* singular homology
* homotopy colimits and model categories (of course, I'll tell you something pretty disturbing first in order to make you care)
* Brauer groups
* representation theory
* de Rham cohomology, and just manifold theory, from a sheafy point of view
* maybe singular cohomology or homotopy theory
* the Yoneda lemma, and other categorical stuff
* (*dramatically puts on sunglasses*) algebraic $K$-theory

For some of those, of course, I'd have to ask the mentors first before putting what are essentially fleshed-out versions of live-TeXed notes from their classes up on my blog.

Also, expect posts on the art of live-TeXing math at 5 am with the help of a good Spacemacs config (which a lot of people at Mathcamp seemed interested in!) and how much I love comfortable text editing in general, as well as some Haskell/Agda/CS stuff.

(I'm going to try and look for the old post on $p$-adics that I submitted to /r/math last year, so that I can put it up again after some cleaning up and expanding. I might even be able to understand Pontryagin duality now if I try hard enough, unlike last time!)

PS. Importantly, I *will* run a Google Analytics instance on this blog, as the Jekyll theme I'm using makes it very easy to do so. If there's an easy way to get a hit-counter that's less intrusive, please let me know.
