---
layout: post
title: What is a prime ideal?
permalink: ideals-and-prime-ideals
hide: true
---

This is a bit of background on ideals, leading up to a somewhat-motivated definition of a prime ideal, that I wrote for [part 1](/schemes-i/) of my [Schemes](make link!) sequence.

### Ideals

Ideals are to rings what normal subgroups are for groups and linear subspaces are for vector spaces: they are the "sub-things" you can quotient by.

Instead of just throwing the definition of an ideal at you without any motivation, there is a piece of near-trivial but beautiful intuition I picked up [here](provide link) which will either entrance you or confuse you:

> An ideal of a ring is a subset of the ring that we talk about as being a "generalized number" that we can talk about elements of the ring being divisible by, where something is said to be "divisible" by an ideal if it is an element of the ideal.

What does this mean? Well, unwrapped, we get the definition of an ideal one finds on Wikipedia or in \\<*insert favorite algebra book here*\\>:

> **Definition**. An ideal is a subset \\(I\\) of a ring \\(R\\) such that
>
> * if \\(a,b\\) are in \\(I\\), then \\(a+b\\in I\\). (\\(2\\) divides \\(4\\) and \\(6\\), so it also divides \\(4 + 6\\).)
> * \\(0\\in I\\), or, if \\(a\\in I\\) then \\(-a\\in I\\) too. (\\(3\\) divides both \\(6\\) and \\(-6\\).)
> * if \\(a\\) is in \\(I\\), then for any \\(r\\in R\\), \\(ra\\in I\\). (\\(6\\) divides \\(12\\), so it also divides \\(5\\cdot 12\\).)

If every element \\(r\\) in an ideal \\(I\\) of a ring \\(R\\) can be expressed as 

\\[ r = e_1r_1 + e_2r_2 + \\ldots + e_kr_k \\]

for some fixed set of elements \\(B = \\{e_1,e_2,\\ldots,e_k\\} \\subset R\\),<!--_--> by choosing appropriate coefficients \\(r_i\\)<!--_--> depending on the element \\(r\\), then the ideal \\(I\\) is said to be generated by the set of the \\(e_i\\). In this case, we can variously write \\(I\\) as 

\\[ I = \\langle E\\rangle = (e_1,e_2,\\ldots,e_k) \\]

This may remind you of linear subspaces from linear algebra -- they are very similar, in significant ways. Also, if all the elements of the ideal can be written as \\(ra\\) for some fixed element \\(a\\in R\\), which implies that

\\[ I = \\{ ra : r \\in R \\} \\]

then \\(I\\) is called a _principal ideal_ and denoted \\(I = (a)\\). Not all ideals are of this form: indeed, in the ring \\(\\zx\\), the ideal \\((2,x)\\) is a non-principal ideal. (It shouldn't be too hard to convince yourself of this.)

Some examples of ideals in rings follow:

* In \\(\\Z\\), the only ideals are those of the form \\(\\\\{da: a\\in\\Z\\\\}\\) for some \\(d\\in\\Z\\), that is, the set of all multiples of \\(\\Z\\). These ideals are always written as \\((d)\\) or, sometimes, \\(d\\Z\\)[^artin]. The latter styles of notation are useful when we happen to be talking about a bunch of rings and need to specify what ring we're considering our ideals to be subsets of.
* In \\(\\R[x]\\), the ring of polynomials with real coefficients, the ideals are all of the form \\((f)\\) for some polynomial \\(f\\). The same holds for \\(\\C[x]\\), and, more generally, for \\(k[x]\\) with \\(k\\) a field.

> **Definition-unwrapping**. What does it mean to say that \\(a\\in(b)\\), for \\(a,b\\in\\Z\\)?

### Prime ideals

Okay, all we need to do is understand the adjective *prime*. Our motivating example here is the ideals \\((p)\\in\\Z\\).

Notice that if \\(ab\\in(p)\\), then at least one of \\(a\\) or \\(b\\) lies in \\(p\\). This is a property of prime numbers, and one that we can talk about more generally:

> **Definition**. If \\(r\\in R\\) is such that \\(r\\) divides a product \\(ab\\) iff \\(r\\) divides at least one of \\(a\\) or \\(b\\), we say that \\(r\\) is a prime element of \\(R\\).

A prime ideal is just what we get by "lifting" this notion to the level of ideals. If you did the definition-unwrapping above, it should feel totally natural to make the following definition:

> **Definition**. An ideal \\(I\\subset R\\) is *prime* if \\(ab\\in I\\) implies \\(a\\in I\\) or \\(b\\in I\\).

* In \\(\\R[x]\\), the ring of polynomials with real coefficients, the ideals are all the polynomials which are of one of the two following forms:
  - \\((x-a)\\) for some \\(a\\in\\R\\)
  - \\((f)\\), where \\(f\\) is some irreducible polynomial. By the fundamental theorem of algebra, such a polynomial must be some quadratic polynomial with no real root.
* In \\(\\cz\\), the ring of polynomials with complex coefficients, the prime[^prime-fix] ideals are all of the form \\((z-a)\\) for some complex \\(a\\). This is very nice, and is again a direct consequence of the fundamental theorem of algebra.

### Maximal ideals

An ideal \\(I\\) is called _maximal_ if no proper ideal strictly contains \\(I\\). 

That is, if \\(I \\subset J\\), then either \\(J = R\\) or \\(I = J\\).

> **Exercise**. All maximal ideals are prime.

---

[^prime-fix]: Fixed thanks to /u/DamnShadowbans over at /r/math on Reddit.

[^artin]: Or \\(\\Z d\\) (hello, Artin).
